GitHub
GitHub is the single largest host for Git repositories, and is the central point of collaboration for
millions of developers and projects. A large percentage of all Git repositories are hosted on GitHub,
and many open-source projects use it for Git hosting, issue tracking, code review, and other things.
So while it’s not a direct part of the Git open source project, there’s a good chance that you’ll want
or need to interact with GitHub at some point while using Git professionally.
This chapter is about using GitHub effectively. We’ll cover signing up for and managing an account,
creating and using Git repositories, common workflows to contribute to projects and to accept
contributions to yours, GitHub’s programmatic interface and lots of little tips to make your life
easier in general.
If you are not interested in using GitHub to host your own projects or to collaborate with other
projects that are hosted on GitHub, you can safely skip to Git Tools.

Interfaces Change
It’s important to note that like many active websites, the UI elements in these
screenshots are bound to change over time. Hopefully the general idea of what
we’re trying to accomplish here will still be there, but if you want more up to date
versions of these screens, the online versions of this book may have newer
screenshots.
Account Setup and Configuration
The first thing you need to do is set up a free user account. Simply visit https://github.com, choose a
user name that isn’t already taken, provide an email address and a password, and click the big
green “Sign up for GitHub” button.
166
Figure 81. The GitHub sign-up form
The next thing you’ll see is the pricing page for upgraded plans, but it’s safe to ignore this for now.
GitHub will send you an email to verify the address you provided. Go ahead and do this; it’s pretty
important (as we’ll see later).

GitHub provides almost all of its functionality with free accounts, except some
advanced features.
GitHub’s paid plans include advanced tools and features as well as increased limits
for free services, but we won’t be covering those in this book. To get more
information about available plans and their comparison, visit https://github.com/
pricing.
Clicking the Octocat logo at the top-left of the screen will take you to your dashboard page. You’re
now ready to use GitHub.
SSH Access
As of right now, you’re fully able to connect with Git repositories using the https:// protocol,
authenticating with the username and password you just set up. However, to simply clone public
projects, you don’t even need to sign up - the account we just created comes into play when we fork
projects and push to our forks a bit later.
If you’d like to use SSH remotes, you’ll need to configure a public key. If you don’t already have one,
167
see Generating Your SSH Public Key. Open up your account settings using the link at the top-right of
the window:
Figure 82. The “Account settings” link
Then select the “SSH keys” section along the left-hand side.
Figure 83. The “SSH keys” link
From there, click the “Add an SSH key” button, give your key a name, paste the contents of your
~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub (or whatever you named it) public-key file into the text area, and click “Add key”.

Be sure to name your SSH key something you can remember. You can name each
of your keys (e.g. "My Laptop" or "Work Account") so that if you need to revoke a
key later, you can easily tell which one you’re looking for.
Your Avatar
Next, if you wish, you can replace the avatar that is generated for you with an image of your
choosing. First go to the “Profile” tab (above the SSH Keys tab) and click “Upload new picture”.
168
Figure 84. The “Profile” link
We’ll choose a copy of the Git logo that is on our hard drive and then we get a chance to crop it.
Figure 85. Crop your uploaded avatar
Now anywhere you interact on the site, people will see your avatar next to your username.
If you happen to have uploaded an avatar to the popular Gravatar service (often used for
WordPress accounts), that avatar will be used by default and you don’t need to do this step.
169
Your Email Addresses
The way that GitHub maps your Git commits to your user is by email address. If you use multiple
email addresses in your commits and you want GitHub to link them up properly, you need to add
all the email addresses you have used to the Emails section of the admin section.
Figure 86. Add all your email addresses
In Add all your email addresses we can see some of the different states that are possible. The top
address is verified and set as the primary address, meaning that is where you’ll get any
notifications and receipts. The second address is verified and so can be set as the primary if you
wish to switch them. The final address is unverified, meaning that you can’t make it your primary
address. If GitHub sees any of these in commit messages in any repository on the site, it will be
linked to your user now.
Two Factor Authentication
Finally, for extra security, you should definitely set up Two-factor Authentication or “2FA”. Two-
factor Authentication is an authentication mechanism that is becoming more and more popular
recently to mitigate the risk of your account being compromised if your password is stolen
somehow. Turning it on will make GitHub ask you for two different methods of authentication, so
that if one of them is compromised, an attacker will not be able to access your account.
You can find the Two-factor Authentication setup under the Security tab of your Account settings.
170
Figure 87. 2FA in the Security Tab
If you click on the “Set up two-factor authentication” button, it will take you to a configuration page
where you can choose to use a phone app to generate your secondary code (a “time based one-time
password”), or you can have GitHub send you a code via SMS each time you need to log in.
After you choose which method you prefer and follow the instructions for setting up 2FA, your
account will then be a little more secure and you will have to provide a code in addition to your
password whenever you log into GitHub.
Contributing to a Project
Now that our account is set up, let’s walk through some details that could be useful in helping you
contribute to an existing project.
Forking Projects
If you want to contribute to an existing project to which you don’t have push access, you can “fork”
the project. When you “fork” a project, GitHub will make a copy of the project that is entirely yours;
it lives in your namespace, and you can push to it.

Historically, the term “fork” has been somewhat negative in context, meaning that
someone took an open source project in a different direction, sometimes creating a
competing project and splitting the contributors. In GitHub, a “fork” is simply the
same project in your own namespace, allowing you to make changes to a project
publicly as a way to contribute in a more open manner.
This way, projects don’t have to worry about adding users as collaborators to give them push
access. People can fork a project, push to it, and contribute their changes back to the original
repository by creating what’s called a Pull Request, which we’ll cover next. This opens up a
discussion thread with code review, and the owner and the contributor can then communicate
171
about the change until the owner is happy with it, at which point the owner can merge it in.
To fork a project, visit the project page and click the “Fork” button at the top-right of the page.
Figure 88. The “Fork” button
After a few seconds, you’ll be taken to your new project page, with your own writeable copy of the
code.
The GitHub Flow
GitHub is designed around a particular collaboration workflow, centered on Pull Requests. This
flow works whether you’re collaborating with a tightly-knit team in a single shared repository, or a
globally-distributed company or network of strangers contributing to a project through dozens of
forks. It is centered on the Topic Branches workflow covered in Git Branching.
Here’s how it generally works:
1. Fork the project.
2. Create a topic branch from master.
3. Make some commits to improve the project.
4. Push this branch to your GitHub project.
5. Open a Pull Request on GitHub.
6. Discuss, and optionally continue committing.
7. The project owner merges or closes the Pull Request.
8. Sync the updated master back to your fork.
This is basically the Integration Manager workflow covered in Integration-Manager Workflow, but
instead of using email to communicate and review changes, teams use GitHub’s web based tools.
Let’s walk through an example of proposing a change to an open source project hosted on GitHub
using this flow.

You can use the official GitHub CLI tool instead of the GitHub web interface for
most things. The tool can be used on Windows, macOS, and Linux systems. Go to
the GitHub CLI homepage for installation instructions and the manual.
Creating a Pull Request
Tony is looking for code to run on his Arduino programmable microcontroller and has found a
great program file on GitHub at https://github.com/schacon/blink.
172
Figure 89. The project we want to contribute to
The only problem is that the blinking rate is too fast. We think it’s much nicer to wait 3 seconds
instead of 1 in between each state change. So let’s improve the program and submit it back to the
project as a proposed change.
First, we click the 'Fork' button as mentioned earlier to get our own copy of the project. Our user
name here is “tonychacon” so our copy of this project is at https://github.com/tonychacon/blink and
that’s where we can edit it. We will clone it locally, create a topic branch, make the code change and
finally push that change back up to GitHub.
$ git clone https://github.com/tonychacon/blink ①
Cloning into 'blink'...
$ cd blink
$ git checkout -b slow-blink ②
Switched to a new branch 'slow-blink'
$ sed -i '' 's/1000/3000/' blink.ino (macOS) ③
# If you're on a Linux system, do this instead:
# $ sed -i 's/1000/3000/' blink.ino ③
$ git diff --word-diff ④
diff --git a/blink.ino b/blink.ino
index 15b9911..a6cc5a5 100644
--- a/blink.ino
+++ b/blink.ino
173
@@ -18,7 +18,7 @@ void setup() {
// the loop routine runs over and over again forever:
void loop() {
  digitalWrite(led, HIGH);   // turn the LED on (HIGH is the voltage level)
  [-delay(1000);-]{+delay(3000);+}               // wait for a second
  digitalWrite(led, LOW);    // turn the LED off by making the voltage LOW
  [-delay(1000);-]{+delay(3000);+}               // wait for a second
}
$ git commit -a -m 'Change delay to 3 seconds' ⑤
[slow-blink 5ca509d] Change delay to 3 seconds
 1 file changed, 2 insertions(+), 2 deletions(-)
$ git push origin slow-blink ⑥
Username for 'https://github.com': tonychacon
Password for 'https://tonychacon@github.com':
Counting objects: 5, done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (3/3), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 340 bytes | 0 bytes/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 1), reused 0 (delta 0)
To https://github.com/tonychacon/blink
 * [new branch]      slow-blink -> slow-blink
①Clone our fork of the project locally.
②Create a descriptive topic branch.
③Make our change to the code.
④Check that the change is good.
⑤Commit our change to the topic branch.
⑥Push our new topic branch back up to our GitHub fork.
Now if we go back to our fork on GitHub, we can see that GitHub noticed that we pushed a new
topic branch up and presents us with a big green button to check out our changes and open a Pull
Request to the original project.
You can alternatively go to the “Branches” page at https://github.com/<user>/<project>/branches to
locate your branch and open a new Pull Request from there.
174
Figure 90. Pull Request button
If we click that green button, we’ll see a screen that asks us to give our Pull Request a title and
description. It is almost always worthwhile to put some effort into this, since a good description
helps the owner of the original project determine what you were trying to do, whether your
proposed changes are correct, and whether accepting the changes would improve the original
project.
We also see a list of the commits in our topic branch that are “ahead” of the master branch (in this
case, just the one) and a unified diff of all the changes that will be made should this branch get
merged by the project owner.
175
Figure 91. Pull Request creation page
When you hit the 'Create pull request' button on this screen, the owner of the project you forked
will get a notification that someone is suggesting a change and will link to a page that has all of this
information on it.

Though Pull Requests are used commonly for public projects like this when the
contributor has a complete change ready to be made, it’s also often used in
internal projects at the beginning of the development cycle. Since you can keep
pushing to the topic branch even after the Pull Request is opened, it’s often
opened early and used as a way to iterate on work as a team within a context,
rather than opened at the very end of the process.
Iterating on a Pull Request
At this point, the project owner can look at the suggested change and merge it, reject it or comment
on it. Let’s say that he likes the idea, but would prefer a slightly longer time for the light to be off
than on.
176
Where this conversation may take place over email in the workflows presented in Distributed Git,
on GitHub this happens online. The project owner can review the unified diff and leave a comment
by clicking on any of the lines.
Figure 92. Comment on a specific line of code in a Pull Request
Once the maintainer makes this comment, the person who opened the Pull Request (and indeed,
anyone else watching the repository) will get a notification. We’ll go over customizing this later, but
if he had email notifications turned on, Tony would get an email like this:
Figure 93. Comments sent as email notifications
Anyone can also leave general comments on the Pull Request. In Pull Request discussion page we
can see an example of the project owner both commenting on a line of code and then leaving a
general comment in the discussion section. You can see that the code comments are brought into
the conversation as well.
177
Figure 94. Pull Request discussion page
Now the contributor can see what they need to do in order to get their change accepted. Luckily this
is very straightforward. Where over email you may have to re-roll your series and resubmit it to
the mailing list, with GitHub you simply commit to the topic branch again and push, which will
automatically update the Pull Request. In Pull Request final you can also see that the old code
comment has been collapsed in the updated Pull Request, since it was made on a line that has since
been changed.
Adding commits to an existing Pull Request doesn’t trigger a notification, so once Tony has pushed
his corrections he decides to leave a comment to inform the project owner that he made the
requested change.
178
Figure 95. Pull Request final
An interesting thing to notice is that if you click on the “Files Changed” tab on this Pull Request,
you’ll get the “unified” diff — that is, the total aggregate difference that would be introduced to your
main branch if this topic branch was merged in. In git diff terms, it basically automatically shows
you git diff master…<branch> for the branch this Pull Request is based on. See Determining What
Is Introduced for more about this type of diff.
The other thing you’ll notice is that GitHub checks to see if the Pull Request merges cleanly and
provides a button to do the merge for you on the server. This button only shows up if you have
write access to the repository and a trivial merge is possible. If you click it GitHub will perform a
“non-fast-forward” merge, meaning that even if the merge could be a fast-forward, it will still
create a merge commit.
If you would prefer, you can simply pull the branch down and merge it locally. If you merge this
179
branch into the master branch and push it to GitHub, the Pull Request will automatically be closed.
This is the basic workflow that most GitHub projects use. Topic branches are created, Pull Requests
are opened on them, a discussion ensues, possibly more work is done on the branch and eventually
the request is either closed or merged.

Not Only Forks
It’s important to note that you can also open a Pull Request between two branches
in the same repository. If you’re working on a feature with someone and you both
have write access to the project, you can push a topic branch to the repository and
open a Pull Request on it to the master branch of that same project to initiate the
code review and discussion process. No forking necessary.
Advanced Pull Requests
Now that we’ve covered the basics of contributing to a project on GitHub, let’s cover a few
interesting tips and tricks about Pull Requests so you can be more effective in using them.
Pull Requests as Patches
It’s important to understand that many projects don’t really think of Pull Requests as queues of
perfect patches that should apply cleanly in order, as most mailing list-based projects think of patch
series contributions. Most GitHub projects think about Pull Request branches as iterative
conversations around a proposed change, culminating in a unified diff that is applied by merging.
This is an important distinction, because generally the change is suggested before the code is
thought to be perfect, which is far more rare with mailing list based patch series contributions. This
enables an earlier conversation with the maintainers so that arriving at the proper solution is more
of a community effort. When code is proposed with a Pull Request and the maintainers or
community suggest a change, the patch series is generally not re-rolled, but instead the difference is
pushed as a new commit to the branch, moving the conversation forward with the context of the
previous work intact.
For instance, if you go back and look again at Pull Request final, you’ll notice that the contributor
did not rebase his commit and send another Pull Request. Instead they added new commits and
pushed them to the existing branch. This way if you go back and look at this Pull Request in the
future, you can easily find all of the context of why decisions were made. Pushing the “Merge”
button on the site purposefully creates a merge commit that references the Pull Request so that it’s
easy to go back and research the original conversation if necessary.
Keeping up with Upstream
If your Pull Request becomes out of date or otherwise doesn’t merge cleanly, you will want to fix it
so the maintainer can easily merge it. GitHub will test this for you and let you know at the bottom
of every Pull Request if the merge is trivial or not.
180
Figure 96. Pull Request does not merge cleanly
If you see something like Pull Request does not merge cleanly, you’ll want to fix your branch so that
it turns green and the maintainer doesn’t have to do extra work.
You have two main options in order to do this. You can either rebase your branch on top of
whatever the target branch is (normally the master branch of the repository you forked), or you can
merge the target branch into your branch.
Most developers on GitHub will choose to do the latter, for the same reasons we just went over in
the previous section. What matters is the history and the final merge, so rebasing isn’t getting you
much other than a slightly cleaner history and in return is far more difficult and error prone.
If you want to merge in the target branch to make your Pull Request mergeable, you would add the
original repository as a new remote, fetch from it, merge the main branch of that repository into
your topic branch, fix any issues and finally push it back up to the same branch you opened the Pull
Request on.
For example, let’s say that in the “tonychacon” example we were using before, the original author
made a change that would create a conflict in the Pull Request. Let’s go through those steps.
$ git remote add upstream https://github.com/schacon/blink ①
$ git fetch upstream ②
remote: Counting objects: 3, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (3/3), done.
Unpacking objects: 100% (3/3), done.
remote: Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
From https://github.com/schacon/blink
 * [new branch]      master     -> upstream/master
$ git merge upstream/master ③
Auto-merging blink.ino
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in blink.ino
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
$ vim blink.ino ④
$ git add blink.ino
$ git commit
[slow-blink 3c8d735] Merge remote-tracking branch 'upstream/master' \
    into slower-blink
$ git push origin slow-blink ⑤
Counting objects: 6, done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (6/6), done.
181
Writing objects: 100% (6/6), 682 bytes | 0 bytes/s, done.
Total 6 (delta 2), reused 0 (delta 0)
To https://github.com/tonychacon/blink
   ef4725c..3c8d735  slower-blink -> slow-blink
①Add the original repository as a remote named upstream.
②Fetch the newest work from that remote.
③Merge the main branch of that repository into your topic branch.
④Fix the conflict that occurred.
⑤Push back up to the same topic branch.
Once you do that, the Pull Request will be automatically updated and re-checked to see if it merges
cleanly.
Figure 97. Pull Request now merges cleanly
One of the great things about Git is that you can do that continuously. If you have a very long-
running project, you can easily merge from the target branch over and over again and only have to
deal with conflicts that have arisen since the last time that you merged, making the process very
manageable.
If you absolutely wish to rebase the branch to clean it up, you can certainly do so, but it is highly
encouraged to not force push over the branch that the Pull Request is already opened on. If other
people have pulled it down and done more work on it, you run into all of the issues outlined in The
Perils of Rebasing. Instead, push the rebased branch to a new branch on GitHub and open a brand
new Pull Request referencing the old one, then close the original.
References
Your next question may be “How do I reference the old Pull Request?”. It turns out there are many,
many ways to reference other things almost anywhere you can write in GitHub.
Let’s start with how to cross-reference another Pull Request or an Issue. All Pull Requests and
Issues are assigned numbers and they are unique within the project. For example, you can’t have
Pull Request #3 and Issue #3. If you want to reference any Pull Request or Issue from any other one,
182
you can simply put #<num> in any comment or description. You can also be more specific if the Issue
or Pull request lives somewhere else; write username#<num> if you’re referring to an Issue or Pull
Request in a fork of the repository you’re in, or username/repo#<num> to reference something in
another repository.
Let’s look at an example. Say we rebased the branch in the previous example, created a new pull
request for it, and now we want to reference the old pull request from the new one. We also want
to reference an issue in the fork of the repository and an issue in a completely different project. We
can fill out the description just like Cross references in a Pull Request.
Figure 98. Cross references in a Pull Request
When we submit this pull request, we’ll see all of that rendered like Cross references rendered in a
Pull Request.
Figure 99. Cross references rendered in a Pull Request
183
Notice that the full GitHub URL we put in there was shortened to just the information needed.
Now if Tony goes back and closes out the original Pull Request, we can see that by mentioning it in
the new one, GitHub has automatically created a trackback event in the Pull Request timeline. This
means that anyone who visits this Pull Request and sees that it is closed can easily link back to the
one that superseded it. The link will look something like Link back to the new Pull Request in the
closed Pull Request timeline.
Figure 100. Link back to the new Pull Request in the closed Pull Request timeline
In addition to issue numbers, you can also reference a specific commit by SHA-1. You have to
specify a full 40 character SHA-1, but if GitHub sees that in a comment, it will link directly to the
commit. Again, you can reference commits in forks or other repositories in the same way you did
with issues.
GitHub Flavored Markdown
Linking to other Issues is just the beginning of interesting things you can do with almost any text
box on GitHub. In Issue and Pull Request descriptions, comments, code comments and more, you
can use what is called “GitHub Flavored Markdown”. Markdown is like writing in plain text but
which is rendered richly.
See An example of GitHub Flavored Markdown as written and as rendered for an example of how
comments or text can be written and then rendered using Markdown.
184
Figure 101. An example of GitHub Flavored Markdown as written and as rendered
The GitHub flavor of Markdown adds more things you can do beyond the basic Markdown syntax.
These can all be really useful when creating useful Pull Request or Issue comments or descriptions.
Task Lists
The first really useful GitHub specific Markdown feature, especially for use in Pull Requests, is the
Task List. A task list is a list of checkboxes of things you want to get done. Putting them into an Issue
or Pull Request normally indicates things that you want to get done before you consider the item
complete.
You can create a task list like this:
- [X] Write the code
- [ ] Write all the tests
- [ ] Document the code
If we include this in the description of our Pull Request or Issue, we’ll see it rendered like Task lists
rendered in a Markdown comment.
Figure 102. Task lists rendered in a Markdown comment
This is often used in Pull Requests to indicate what all you would like to get done on the branch
before the Pull Request will be ready to merge. The really cool part is that you can simply click the
checkboxes to update the comment — you don’t have to edit the Markdown directly to check tasks
185
off.
What’s more, GitHub will look for task lists in your Issues and Pull Requests and show them as
metadata on the pages that list them out. For example, if you have a Pull Request with tasks and
you look at the overview page of all Pull Requests, you can see how far done it is. This helps people
break down Pull Requests into subtasks and helps other people track the progress of the branch.
You can see an example of this in Task list summary in the Pull Request list.
Figure 103. Task list summary in the Pull Request list
These are incredibly useful when you open a Pull Request early and use it to track your progress
through the implementation of the feature.
Code Snippets
You can also add code snippets to comments. This is especially useful if you want to present
something that you could try to do before actually implementing it as a commit on your branch.
This is also often used to add example code of what is not working or what this Pull Request could
implement.
To add a snippet of code you have to “fence” it in backticks.
```java
for(int i=0 ; i < 5 ; i++)
{
   System.out.println("i is : " + i);
}
```
If you add a language name like we did there with 'java', GitHub will also try to syntax highlight the
snippet. In the case of the above example, it would end up rendering like Rendered fenced code
example.
186
Figure 104. Rendered fenced code example
Quoting
If you’re responding to a small part of a long comment, you can selectively quote out of the other
comment by preceding the lines with the > character. In fact, this is so common and so useful that
there is a keyboard shortcut for it. If you highlight text in a comment that you want to directly reply
to and hit the r key, it will quote that text in the comment box for you.
The quotes look something like this:
> Whether 'tis Nobler in the mind to suffer
> The Slings and Arrows of outrageous Fortune,
How big are these slings and in particular, these arrows?
Once rendered, the comment will look like Rendered quoting example.
Figure 105. Rendered quoting example
187
Emoji
Finally, you can also use emoji in your comments. This is actually used quite extensively in
comments you see on many GitHub Issues and Pull Requests. There is even an emoji helper in
GitHub. If you are typing a comment and you start with a : character, an autocompleter will help
you find what you’re looking for.
Figure 106. Emoji autocompleter in action
Emojis take the form of :<name>: anywhere in the comment. For instance, you could write
something like this:
I :eyes: that :bug: and I :cold_sweat:.
:trophy: for :microscope: it.
:+1: and :sparkles: on this :ship:, it's :fire::poop:!
:clap::tada::panda_face:
When rendered, it would look something like Heavy emoji commenting.
Figure 107. Heavy emoji commenting
Not that this is incredibly useful, but it does add an element of fun and emotion to a medium that is
otherwise hard to convey emotion in.
188

There are actually quite a number of web services that make use of emoji
characters these days. A great cheat sheet to reference to find emoji that expresses
what you want to say can be found at:
https://www.webfx.com/tools/emoji-cheat-sheet/
Images
This isn’t technically GitHub Flavored Markdown, but it is incredibly useful. In addition to adding
Markdown image links to comments, which can be difficult to find and embed URLs for, GitHub
allows you to drag and drop images into text areas to embed them.
Figure 108. Drag and drop images to upload them and auto-embed them
If you look at Drag and drop images to upload them and auto-embed them, you can see a small
“Parsed as Markdown” hint above the text area. Clicking on that will give you a full cheat sheet of
everything you can do with Markdown on GitHub.
Keep your GitHub public repository up-to-date
Once you’ve forked a GitHub repository, your repository (your "fork") exists independently from
the original. In particular, when the original repository has new commits, GitHub informs you by a
message like:
This branch is 5 commits behind progit:master.
189
But your GitHub repository will never be automatically updated by GitHub; this is something that
you must do yourself. Fortunately, this is very easy to do.
One possibility to do this requires no configuration. For example, if you forked from
https://github.com/progit/progit2.git, you can keep your master branch up-to-date like this:
$ git checkout master ①
$ git pull https://github.com/progit/progit2.git ②
$ git push origin master ③
①If you were on another branch, return to master.
②Fetch changes from https://github.com/progit/progit2.git and merge them into master.
③Push your master branch to origin.
This works, but it is a little tedious having to spell out the fetch URL every time. You can automate
this work with a bit of configuration:
$ git remote add progit https://github.com/progit/progit2.git ①
$ git fetch progit ②
$ git branch --set-upstream-to=progit/master master ③
$ git config --local remote.pushDefault origin ④
①Add the source repository and give it a name. Here, I have chosen to call it progit.
②Get a reference on progit’s branches, in particular master.
③Set your master branch to fetch from the progit remote.
④Define the default push repository to origin.
Once this is done, the workflow becomes much simpler:
$ git checkout master ①
$ git pull ②
$ git push ③
①If you were on another branch, return to master.
②Fetch changes from progit and merge changes into master.
③Push your master branch to origin.
This approach can be useful, but it’s not without downsides. Git will happily do this work for you
silently, but it won’t warn you if you make a commit to master, pull from progit, then push to
origin — all of those operations are valid with this setup. So you’ll have to take care never to
commit directly to master, since that branch effectively belongs to the upstream repository.
190
Maintaining a Project
Now that we’re comfortable contributing to a project, let’s look at the other side: creating,
maintaining and administering your own project.
Creating a New Repository
Let’s create a new repository to share our project code with. Start by clicking the “New repository”
button on the right-hand side of the dashboard, or from the + button in the top toolbar next to your
username as seen in The “New repository” dropdown.
Figure 109. The “Your repositories” area
Figure 110. The “New repository” dropdown
This takes you to the “new repository” form:
191
Figure 111. The “new repository” form
All you really have to do here is provide a project name; the rest of the fields are completely
optional. For now, just click the “Create Repository” button, and boom — you have a new repository
on GitHub, named <user>/<project_name>.
Since you have no code there yet, GitHub will show you instructions for how to create a brand-new
Git repository, or connect an existing Git project. We won’t belabor this here; if you need a
refresher, check out Git Basics.
Now that your project is hosted on GitHub, you can give the URL to anyone you want to share your
project 
with. 
Every 
project 
on 
GitHub 
is 
accessible 
over 
HTTPS 
as
https://github.com/<user>/<project_name>, and over SSH as git@github.com:<user>/<project_name>.
Git can fetch from and push to both of these URLs, but they are access-controlled based on the
credentials of the user connecting to them.

It is often preferable to share the HTTPS based URL for a public project, since the
user does not have to have a GitHub account to access it for cloning. Users will
have to have an account and an uploaded SSH key to access your project if you
give them the SSH URL. The HTTPS one is also exactly the same URL they would
paste into a browser to view the project there.
Adding Collaborators
If you’re working with other people who you want to give commit access to, you need to add them
as “collaborators”. If Ben, Jeff, and Louise all sign up for accounts on GitHub, and you want to give
them push access to your repository, you can add them to your project. Doing so will give them
“push” access, which means they have both read and write access to the project and Git repository.
Click the “Settings” link at the bottom of the right-hand sidebar.
192
Figure 112. The repository settings link
Then select “Collaborators” from the menu on the left-hand side. Then, just type a username into
the box, and click “Add collaborator.” You can repeat this as many times as you like to grant access
to everyone you like. If you need to revoke access, just click the “X” on the right-hand side of their
row.
Figure 113. The repository collaborators box
Managing Pull Requests
Now that you have a project with some code in it and maybe even a few collaborators who also
have push access, let’s go over what to do when you get a Pull Request yourself.
Pull Requests can either come from a branch in a fork of your repository or they can come from
another branch in the same repository. The only difference is that the ones in a fork are often from
people where you can’t push to their branch and they can’t push to yours, whereas with internal
Pull Requests generally both parties can access the branch.
193
For these examples, let’s assume you are “tonychacon” and you’ve created a new Arduino code
project named “fade”.
Email Notifications
Someone comes along and makes a change to your code and sends you a Pull Request. You should
get an email notifying you about the new Pull Request and it should look something like Email
notification of a new Pull Request.
Figure 114. Email notification of a new Pull Request
There are a few things to notice about this email. It will give you a small diffstat — a list of files that
have changed in the Pull Request and by how much. It gives you a link to the Pull Request on
GitHub. It also gives you a few URLs that you can use from the command line.
If you notice the line that says git pull <url> patch-1, this is a simple way to merge in a remote
branch without having to add a remote. We went over this quickly in Checking Out Remote
Branches. If you wish, you can create and switch to a topic branch and then run this command to
merge in the Pull Request changes.
The other interesting URLs are the .diff and .patch URLs, which as you may guess, provide unified
diff and patch versions of the Pull Request. You could technically merge in the Pull Request work
with something like this:
$ curl https://github.com/tonychacon/fade/pull/1.patch | git am
194
Collaborating on the Pull Request
As we covered in The GitHub Flow, you can now have a conversation with the person who opened
the Pull Request. You can comment on specific lines of code, comment on whole commits or
comment on the entire Pull Request itself, using GitHub Flavored Markdown everywhere.
Every time someone else comments on the Pull Request you will continue to get email notifications
so you know there is activity happening. They will each have a link to the Pull Request where the
activity is happening and you can also directly respond to the email to comment on the Pull Request
thread.
Figure 115. Responses to emails are included in the thread
Once the code is in a place you like and want to merge it in, you can either pull the code down and
merge it locally, either with the git pull <url> <branch> syntax we saw earlier, or by adding the
fork as a remote and fetching and merging.
If the merge is trivial, you can also just hit the “Merge” button on the GitHub site. This will do a
“non-fast-forward” merge, creating a merge commit even if a fast-forward merge was possible. This
means that no matter what, every time you hit the merge button, a merge commit is created. As you
can see in Merge button and instructions for merging a Pull Request manually, GitHub gives you all
of this information if you click the hint link.
195
Figure 116. Merge button and instructions for merging a Pull Request manually
If you decide you don’t want to merge it, you can also just close the Pull Request and the person
who opened it will be notified.
Pull Request Refs
If you’re dealing with a lot of Pull Requests and don’t want to add a bunch of remotes or do one
time pulls every time, there is a neat trick that GitHub allows you to do. This is a bit of an advanced
trick and we’ll go over the details of this a bit more in The Refspec, but it can be pretty useful.
GitHub actually advertises the Pull Request branches for a repository as sort of pseudo-branches on
the server. By default you don’t get them when you clone, but they are there in an obscured way
and you can access them pretty easily.
To demonstrate this, we’re going to use a low-level command (often referred to as a “plumbing”
command, which we’ll read about more in Plumbing and Porcelain) called ls-remote. This
command is generally not used in day-to-day Git operations but it’s useful to show us what
references are present on the server.
If we run this command against the “blink” repository we were using earlier, we will get a list of all
the branches and tags and other references in the repository.
$ git ls-remote https://github.com/schacon/blink
10d539600d86723087810ec636870a504f4fee4d    HEAD
10d539600d86723087810ec636870a504f4fee4d    refs/heads/master
6a83107c62950be9453aac297bb0193fd743cd6e    refs/pull/1/head
afe83c2d1a70674c9505cc1d8b7d380d5e076ed3    refs/pull/1/merge
3c8d735ee16296c242be7a9742ebfbc2665adec1    refs/pull/2/head
15c9f4f80973a2758462ab2066b6ad9fe8dcf03d    refs/pull/2/merge
a5a7751a33b7e86c5e9bb07b26001bb17d775d1a    refs/pull/4/head
31a45fc257e8433c8d8804e3e848cf61c9d3166c    refs/pull/4/merge
196
Of course, if you’re in your repository and you run git ls-remote origin or whatever remote you
want to check, it will show you something similar to this.
If the repository is on GitHub and you have any Pull Requests that have been opened, you’ll get
these references that are prefixed with refs/pull/. These are basically branches, but since they’re
not under refs/heads/ you don’t get them normally when you clone or fetch from the server — the
process of fetching ignores them normally.
There are two references per Pull Request - the one that ends in /head points to exactly the same
commit as the last commit in the Pull Request branch. So if someone opens a Pull Request in our
repository and their branch is named bug-fix and it points to commit a5a775, then in our repository
we will not have a bug-fix branch (since that’s in their fork), but we will have pull/<pr#>/head that
points to a5a775. This means that we can pretty easily pull down every Pull Request branch in one
go without having to add a bunch of remotes.
Now, you could do something like fetching the reference directly.
$ git fetch origin refs/pull/958/head
From https://github.com/libgit2/libgit2
 * branch            refs/pull/958/head -> FETCH_HEAD
This tells Git, “Connect to the origin remote, and download the ref named refs/pull/958/head.” Git
happily obeys, and downloads everything you need to construct that ref, and puts a pointer to the
commit you want under .git/FETCH_HEAD. You can follow that up with git merge FETCH_HEAD into a
branch you want to test it in, but that merge commit message looks a bit weird. Also, if you’re
reviewing a lot of pull requests, this gets tedious.
There’s also a way to fetch all of the pull requests, and keep them up to date whenever you connect
to the remote. Open up .git/config in your favorite editor, and look for the origin remote. It should
look a bit like this:
[remote "origin"]
    url = https://github.com/libgit2/libgit2
    fetch = +refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*
That line that begins with fetch = is a “refspec.” It’s a way of mapping names on the remote with
names in your local .git directory. This particular one tells Git, "the things on the remote that are
under refs/heads should go in my local repository under refs/remotes/origin." You can modify this
section to add another refspec:
[remote "origin"]
    url = https://github.com/libgit2/libgit2.git
    fetch = +refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*
    fetch = +refs/pull/*/head:refs/remotes/origin/pr/*
That last line tells Git, “All the refs that look like refs/pull/123/head should be stored locally like
197
refs/remotes/origin/pr/123.” Now, if you save that file, and do a git fetch:
$ git fetch
# …
 * [new ref]         refs/pull/1/head -> origin/pr/1
 * [new ref]         refs/pull/2/head -> origin/pr/2
 * [new ref]         refs/pull/4/head -> origin/pr/4
# …
Now all of the remote pull requests are represented locally with refs that act much like tracking
branches; they’re read-only, and they update when you do a fetch. This makes it super easy to try
the code from a pull request locally:
$ git checkout pr/2
Checking out files: 100% (3769/3769), done.
Branch pr/2 set up to track remote branch pr/2 from origin.
Switched to a new branch 'pr/2'
The eagle-eyed among you would note the head on the end of the remote portion of the refspec.
There’s also a refs/pull/#/merge ref on the GitHub side, which represents the commit that would
result if you push the “merge” button on the site. This can allow you to test the merge before even
hitting the button.
Pull Requests on Pull Requests
Not only can you open Pull Requests that target the main or master branch, you can actually open a
Pull Request targeting any branch in the network. In fact, you can even target another Pull Request.
If you see a Pull Request that is moving in the right direction and you have an idea for a change that
depends on it or you’re not sure is a good idea, or you just don’t have push access to the target
branch, you can open a Pull Request directly to it.
When you go to open a Pull Request, there is a box at the top of the page that specifies which
branch you’re requesting to pull to and which you’re requesting to pull from. If you hit the “Edit”
button at the right of that box you can change not only the branches but also which fork.
198
Figure 117. Manually change the Pull Request target fork and branch
Here you can fairly easily specify to merge your new branch into another Pull Request or another
fork of the project.
Mentions and Notifications
GitHub also has a pretty nice notifications system built in that can come in handy when you have
questions or need feedback from specific individuals or teams.
In any comment you can start typing a @ character and it will begin to autocomplete with the names
and usernames of people who are collaborators or contributors in the project.
Figure 118. Start typing @ to mention someone
You can also mention a user who is not in that dropdown, but often the autocompleter can make it
faster.
Once you post a comment with a user mention, that user will be notified. This means that this can
be a really effective way of pulling people into conversations rather than making them poll. Very
often in Pull Requests on GitHub people will pull in other people on their teams or in their company
to review an Issue or Pull Request.
199
If someone gets mentioned on a Pull Request or Issue, they will be “subscribed” to it and will
continue getting notifications any time some activity occurs on it. You will also be subscribed to
something if you opened it, if you’re watching the repository or if you comment on something. If
you no longer wish to receive notifications, there is an “Unsubscribe” button on the page you can
click to stop receiving updates on it.
Figure 119. Unsubscribe from an Issue or Pull Request
The Notifications Page
When we mention “notifications” here with respect to GitHub, we mean a specific way that GitHub
tries to get in touch with you when events happen and there are a few different ways you can
configure them. If you go to the “Notification center” tab from the settings page, you can see some
of the options you have.
200
Figure 120. Notification center options
The two choices are to get notifications over “Email” and over “Web” and you can choose either,
neither or both for when you actively participate in things and for activity on repositories you are
watching.
Web Notifications
Web notifications only exist on GitHub and you can only check them on GitHub. If you have this
option selected in your preferences and a notification is triggered for you, you will see a small blue
dot over your notifications icon at the top of your screen as seen in Notification center.
Figure 121. Notification center
If you click on that, you will see a list of all the items you have been notified about, grouped by
project. You can filter to the notifications of a specific project by clicking on its name in the left
hand sidebar. You can also acknowledge the notification by clicking the checkmark icon next to any
201
notification, or acknowledge all of the notifications in a project by clicking the checkmark at the top
of the group. There is also a mute button next to each checkmark that you can click to not receive
any further notifications on that item.
All of these tools are very useful for handling large numbers of notifications. Many GitHub power
users will simply turn off email notifications entirely and manage all of their notifications through
this screen.
Email Notifications
Email notifications are the other way you can handle notifications through GitHub. If you have this
turned on you will get emails for each notification. We saw examples of this in Comments sent as
email notifications and Email notification of a new Pull Request. The emails will also be threaded
properly, which is nice if you’re using a threading email client.
There is also a fair amount of metadata embedded in the headers of the emails that GitHub sends
you, which can be really helpful for setting up custom filters and rules.
For instance, if we look at the actual email headers sent to Tony in the email shown in Email
notification of a new Pull Request, we will see the following among the information sent:
To: tonychacon/fade <fade@noreply.github.com>
Message-ID: <tonychacon/fade/pull/1@github.com>
Subject: [fade] Wait longer to see the dimming effect better (#1)
X-GitHub-Recipient: tonychacon
List-ID: tonychacon/fade <fade.tonychacon.github.com>
List-Archive: https://github.com/tonychacon/fade
List-Post: <mailto:reply+i-4XXX@reply.github.com>
List-Unsubscribe: <mailto:unsub+i-XXX@reply.github.com>,...
X-GitHub-Recipient-Address: tchacon@example.com
There are a couple of interesting things here. If you want to highlight or re-route emails to this
particular project or even Pull Request, the information in Message-ID gives you all the data in
<user>/<project>/<type>/<id> format. If this was an issue, for example, the <type> field would have
been “issues” rather than “pull”.
The List-Post and List-Unsubscribe fields mean that if you have a mail client that understands
those, you can easily post to the list or “Unsubscribe” from the thread. That would be essentially the
same as clicking the “mute” button on the web version of the notification or “Unsubscribe” on the
Issue or Pull Request page itself.
It’s also worth noting that if you have both email and web notifications enabled and you read the
email version of the notification, the web version will be marked as read as well if you have images
allowed in your mail client.
Special Files
There are a couple of special files that GitHub will notice if they are present in your repository.
202
README
The first is the README file, which can be of nearly any format that GitHub recognizes as prose. For
example, it could be README, README.md, README.asciidoc, etc. If GitHub sees a README file in your
source, it will render it on the landing page of the project.
Many teams use this file to hold all the relevant project information for someone who might be new
to the repository or project. This generally includes things like:
• What the project is for
• How to configure and install it
• An example of how to use it or get it running
• The license that the project is offered under
• How to contribute to it
Since GitHub will render this file, you can embed images or links in it for added ease of
understanding.
CONTRIBUTING
The other special file that GitHub recognizes is the CONTRIBUTING file. If you have a file named
CONTRIBUTING with any file extension, GitHub will show Opening a Pull Request when a
CONTRIBUTING file exists when anyone starts opening a Pull Request.
Figure 122. Opening a Pull Request when a CONTRIBUTING file exists
The idea here is that you can specify specific things you want or don’t want in a Pull Request sent to
your project. This way people may actually read the guidelines before opening the Pull Request.
Project Administration
Generally there are not a lot of administrative things you can do with a single project, but there are
a couple of items that might be of interest.
203
Changing the Default Branch
If you are using a branch other than “master” as your default branch that you want people to open
Pull Requests on or see by default, you can change that in your repository’s settings page under the
“Options” tab.
Figure 123. Change the default branch for a project
Simply change the default branch in the dropdown and that will be the default for all major
operations from then on, including which branch is checked out by default when someone clones
the repository.
Transferring a Project
If you would like to transfer a project to another user or an organization in GitHub, there is a
“Transfer ownership” option at the bottom of the same “Options” tab of your repository settings
page that allows you to do this.
Figure 124. Transfer a project to another GitHub user or Organization
This is helpful if you are abandoning a project and someone wants to take it over, or if your project
is getting bigger and want to move it into an organization.
Not only does this move the repository along with all its watchers and stars to another place, it also
sets up a redirect from your URL to the new place. It will also redirect clones and fetches from Git,
not just web requests.
204
Managing an organization
In addition to single-user accounts, GitHub has what are called Organizations. Like personal
accounts, Organizational accounts have a namespace where all their projects exist, but many other
things are different. These accounts represent a group of people with shared ownership of projects,
and there are many tools to manage subgroups of those people. Normally these accounts are used
for Open Source groups (such as “perl” or “rails”) or companies (such as “google” or “twitter”).
Organization Basics
An organization is pretty easy to create; just click on the “+” icon at the top-right of any GitHub
page, and select “New organization” from the menu.
Figure 125. The “New organization” menu item
First you’ll need to name your organization and provide an email address for a main point of
contact for the group. Then you can invite other users to be co-owners of the account if you want to.
Follow these steps and you’ll soon be the owner of a brand-new organization. Like personal
accounts, organizations are free if everything you plan to store there will be open source.
As an owner in an organization, when you fork a repository, you’ll have the choice of forking it to
your organization’s namespace. When you create new repositories you can create them either
under your personal account or under any of the organizations that you are an owner in. You also
automatically “watch” any new repository created under these organizations.
Just like in Your Avatar, you can upload an avatar for your organization to personalize it a bit. Also
just like personal accounts, you have a landing page for the organization that lists all of your
repositories and can be viewed by other people.
Now let’s cover some of the things that are a bit different with an organizational account.
Teams
Organizations are associated with individual people by way of teams, which are simply a grouping
of individual user accounts and repositories within the organization and what kind of access those
people have in those repositories.
205
For example, say your company has three repositories: frontend, backend, and deployscripts. You’d
want your HTML/CSS/JavaScript developers to have access to frontend and maybe backend, and your
Operations people to have access to backend and deployscripts. Teams make this easy, without
having to manage the collaborators for every individual repository.
The Organization page shows you a simple dashboard of all the repositories, users and teams that
are under this organization.
Figure 126. The Organization page
To manage your Teams, you can click on the Teams sidebar on the right hand side of the page in
The Organization page. This will bring you to a page you can use to add members to the team, add
repositories to the team or manage the settings and access control levels for the team. Each team
can have read only, read/write or administrative access to the repositories. You can change that
level by clicking the “Settings” button in The Team page.
206
Figure 127. The Team page
When you invite someone to a team, they will get an email letting them know they’ve been invited.
Additionally, team @mentions (such as @acmecorp/frontend) work much the same as they do with
individual users, except that all members of the team are then subscribed to the thread. This is
useful if you want the attention from someone on a team, but you don’t know exactly who to ask.
A user can belong to any number of teams, so don’t limit yourself to only access-control teams.
Special-interest teams like ux, css, or refactoring are useful for certain kinds of questions, and
others like legal and colorblind for an entirely different kind.
Audit Log
Organizations also give owners access to all the information about what went on under the
organization. You can go to the 'Audit Log' tab and see what events have happened at an
organization level, who did them and where in the world they were done.
207
Figure 128. The Audit log
You can also filter down to specific types of events, specific places or specific people.
Scripting GitHub
So now we’ve covered all of the major features and workflows of GitHub, but any large group or
project will have customizations they may want to make or external services they may want to
integrate.
Luckily for us, GitHub is really quite hackable in many ways. In this section we’ll cover how to use
the GitHub hooks system and its API to make GitHub work how we want it to.
Services and Hooks
The Hooks and Services section of GitHub repository administration is the easiest way to have
208
GitHub interact with external systems.
Services
First we’ll take a look at Services. Both the Hooks and Services integrations can be found in the
Settings section of your repository, where we previously looked at adding Collaborators and
changing the default branch of your project. Under the “Webhooks and Services” tab you will see
something like Services and Hooks configuration section.
Figure 129. Services and Hooks configuration section
There are dozens of services you can choose from, most of them integrations into other commercial
and open source systems. Most of them are for Continuous Integration services, bug and issue
trackers, chat room systems and documentation systems. We’ll walk through setting up a very
simple one, the Email hook. If you choose “email” from the “Add Service” dropdown, you’ll get a
configuration screen like Email service configuration.
Figure 130. Email service configuration
209
In this case, if we hit the “Add service” button, the email address we specified will get an email
every time someone pushes to the repository. Services can listen for lots of different types of events,
but most only listen for push events and then do something with that data.
If there is a system you are using that you would like to integrate with GitHub, you should check
here to see if there is an existing service integration available. For example, if you’re using Jenkins
to run tests on your codebase, you can enable the Jenkins builtin service integration to kick off a
test run every time someone pushes to your repository.
Hooks
If you need something more specific or you want to integrate with a service or site that is not
included in this list, you can instead use the more generic hooks system. GitHub repository hooks
are pretty simple. You specify a URL and GitHub will post an HTTP payload to that URL on any
event you want.
Generally the way this works is you can setup a small web service to listen for a GitHub hook
payload and then do something with the data when it is received.
To enable a hook, you click the “Add webhook” button in Services and Hooks configuration section.
This will bring you to a page that looks like Web hook configuration.
Figure 131. Web hook configuration
The configuration for a web hook is pretty simple. In most cases you simply enter a URL and a
secret key and hit “Add webhook”. There are a few options for which events you want GitHub to
send you a payload for — the default is to only get a payload for the push event, when someone
pushes new code to any branch of your repository.
210
Let’s see a small example of a web service you may set up to handle a web hook. We’ll use the Ruby
web framework Sinatra since it’s fairly concise and you should be able to easily see what we’re
doing.
Let’s say we want to get an email if a specific person pushes to a specific branch of our project
modifying a specific file. We could fairly easily do that with code like this:
require 'sinatra'
require 'json'
require 'mail'
post '/payload' do
  push = JSON.parse(request.body.read) # parse the JSON
  # gather the data we're looking for
  pusher = push["pusher"]["name"]
  branch = push["ref"]
  # get a list of all the files touched
  files = push["commits"].map do |commit|
    commit['added'] + commit['modified'] + commit['removed']
  end
  files = files.flatten.uniq
  # check for our criteria
  if pusher == 'schacon' &&
     branch == 'ref/heads/special-branch' &&
     files.include?('special-file.txt')
    Mail.deliver do
      from     'tchacon@example.com'
      to       'tchacon@example.com'
      subject  'Scott Changed the File'
      body     "ALARM"
    end
  end
end
Here we’re taking the JSON payload that GitHub delivers us and looking up who pushed it, what
branch they pushed to and what files were touched in all the commits that were pushed. Then we
check that against our criteria and send an email if it matches.
In order to develop and test something like this, you have a nice developer console in the same
screen where you set the hook up. You can see the last few deliveries that GitHub has tried to make
for that webhook. For each hook you can dig down into when it was delivered, if it was successful
and the body and headers for both the request and the response. This makes it incredibly easy to
test and debug your hooks.
211
Figure 132. Web hook debugging information
The other great feature of this is that you can redeliver any of the payloads to test your service
easily.
For more information on how to write webhooks and all the different event types you can listen
for, go to the GitHub Developer documentation at https://docs.github.com/en/webhooks-and-events/
webhooks/about-webhooks.
The GitHub API
Services and hooks give you a way to receive push notifications about events that happen on your
repositories, but what if you need more information about these events? What if you need to
automate something like adding collaborators or labeling issues?
212
This is where the GitHub API comes in handy. GitHub has tons of API endpoints for doing nearly
anything you can do on the website in an automated fashion. In this section we’ll learn how to
authenticate and connect to the API, how to comment on an issue and how to change the status of a
Pull Request through the API.
Basic Usage
The most basic thing you can do is a simple GET request on an endpoint that doesn’t require
authentication. This could be a user or read-only information on an open source project. For
example, if we want to know more about a user named “schacon”, we can run something like this:
$ curl https://api.github.com/users/schacon
{
  "login": "schacon",
  "id": 70,
  "avatar_url": "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/70",
# …
  "name": "Scott Chacon",
  "company": "GitHub",
  "following": 19,
  "created_at": "2008-01-27T17:19:28Z",
  "updated_at": "2014-06-10T02:37:23Z"
}
There are tons of endpoints like this to get information about organizations, projects, issues,
commits — just about anything you can publicly see on GitHub. You can even use the API to render
arbitrary Markdown or find a .gitignore template.
$ curl https://api.github.com/gitignore/templates/Java
{
  "name": "Java",
  "source": "*.class
# Mobile Tools for Java (J2ME)
.mtj.tmp/
# Package Files #
*.jar
*.war
*.ear
# virtual machine crash logs, see
https://www.java.com/en/download/help/error_hotspot.xml
hs_err_pid*
"
}
213
Commenting on an Issue
However, if you want to do an action on the website such as comment on an Issue or Pull Request
or if you want to view or interact with private content, you’ll need to authenticate.
There are several ways to authenticate. You can use basic authentication with just your username
and password, but generally it’s a better idea to use a personal access token. You can generate this
from the “Applications” tab of your settings page.
Figure 133. Generate your access token from the “Applications” tab of your settings page
It will ask you which scopes you want for this token and a description. Make sure to use a good
description so you feel comfortable removing the token when your script or application is no
longer used.
GitHub will only show you the token once, so be sure to copy it. You can now use this to
authenticate in your script instead of using a username and password. This is nice because you can
limit the scope of what you want to do and the token is revocable.
This also has the added advantage of increasing your rate limit. Without authenticating, you will be
limited to 60 requests per hour. If you authenticate you can make up to 5,000 requests per hour.
So let’s use it to make a comment on one of our issues. Let’s say we want to leave a comment on a
specific 
issue, 
Issue 
#6. 
To 
do 
so 
we 
have 
to 
do 
an 
HTTP 
POST 
request 
to
repos/<user>/<repo>/issues/<num>/comments with the token we just generated as an Authorization
header.
$ curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
       -H "Authorization: token TOKEN" \
       --data '{"body":"A new comment, :+1:"}' \
       https://api.github.com/repos/schacon/blink/issues/6/comments
214
{
  "id": 58322100,
  "html_url": "https://github.com/schacon/blink/issues/6#issuecomment-58322100",
  ...
  "user": {
    "login": "tonychacon",
    "id": 7874698,
    "avatar_url": "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/7874698?v=2",
    "type": "User",
  },
  "created_at": "2014-10-08T07:48:19Z",
  "updated_at": "2014-10-08T07:48:19Z",
  "body": "A new comment, :+1:"
}
Now if you go to that issue, you can see the comment that we just successfully posted as in A
comment posted from the GitHub API.
Figure 134. A comment posted from the GitHub API
You can use the API to do just about anything you can do on the website — creating and setting
milestones, assigning people to Issues and Pull Requests, creating and changing labels, accessing
commit data, creating new commits and branches, opening, closing or merging Pull Requests,
creating and editing teams, commenting on lines of code in a Pull Request, searching the site and on
and on.
Changing the Status of a Pull Request
There is one final example we’ll look at since it’s really useful if you’re working with Pull Requests.
Each commit can have one or more statuses associated with it and there is an API to add and query
that status.
Most of the Continuous Integration and testing services make use of this API to react to pushes by
testing the code that was pushed, and then report back if that commit has passed all the tests. You
could also use this to check if the commit message is properly formatted, if the submitter followed
all your contribution guidelines, if the commit was validly signed — any number of things.
Let’s say you set up a webhook on your repository that hits a small web service that checks for a
Signed-off-by string in the commit message.
require 'httparty'
require 'sinatra'
require 'json'
215
post '/payload' do
  push = JSON.parse(request.body.read) # parse the JSON
  repo_name = push['repository']['full_name']
  # look through each commit message
  push["commits"].each do |commit|
    # look for a Signed-off-by string
    if /Signed-off-by/.match commit['message']
      state = 'success'
      description = 'Successfully signed off!'
    else
      state = 'failure'
      description = 'No signoff found.'
    end
    # post status to GitHub
    sha = commit["id"]
    status_url = "https://api.github.com/repos/#{repo_name}/statuses/#{sha}"
    status = {
      "state"       => state,
      "description" => description,
      "target_url"  => "http://example.com/how-to-signoff",
      "context"     => "validate/signoff"
    }
    HTTParty.post(status_url,
      :body => status.to_json,
      :headers => {
        'Content-Type'  => 'application/json',
        'User-Agent'    => 'tonychacon/signoff',
        'Authorization' => "token #{ENV['TOKEN']}" }
    )
  end
end
Hopefully this is fairly simple to follow. In this web hook handler we look through each commit that
was just pushed, we look for the string 'Signed-off-by' in the commit message and finally we POST
via HTTP to the /repos/<user>/<repo>/statuses/<commit_sha> API endpoint with the status.
In this case you can send a state ('success', 'failure', 'error'), a description of what happened, a target
URL the user can go to for more information and a “context” in case there are multiple statuses for
a single commit. For example, a testing service may provide a status and a validation service like
this may also provide a status — the “context” field is how they’re differentiated.
If someone opens a new Pull Request on GitHub and this hook is set up, you may see something like
Commit status via the API.
216
Figure 135. Commit status via the API
You can now see a little green check mark next to the commit that has a “Signed-off-by” string in the
message and a red cross through the one where the author forgot to sign off. You can also see that
the Pull Request takes the status of the last commit on the branch and warns you if it is a failure.
This is really useful if you’re using this API for test results so you don’t accidentally merge
something where the last commit is failing tests.
Octokit
Though we’ve been doing nearly everything through curl and simple HTTP requests in these
examples, several open-source libraries exist that make this API available in a more idiomatic way.
At the time of this writing, the supported languages include Go, Objective-C, Ruby, and .NET. Check
out https://github.com/octokit for more information on these, as they handle much of the HTTP for
you.
Hopefully these tools can help you customize and modify GitHub to work better for your specific
workflows. For complete documentation on the entire API as well as guides for common tasks,
check out https://docs.github.com/.
Summary
Now you’re a GitHub user. You know how to create an account, manage an organization, create and
push to repositories, contribute to other people’s projects and accept contributions from others. In
the next chapter, you’ll learn more powerful tools and tips for dealing with complex situations,
which will truly make you a Git master.
217
Git Tools
By now, you’ve learned most of the day-to-day commands and workflows that you need to manage
or maintain a Git repository for your source code control. You’ve accomplished the basic tasks of
tracking and committing files, and you’ve harnessed the power of the staging area and lightweight
topic branching and merging.
Now you’ll explore a number of very powerful things that Git can do that you may not necessarily
use on a day-to-day basis but that you may need at some point.
Revision Selection
Git allows you to refer to a single commit, set of commits, or range of commits in a number of ways.
They aren’t necessarily obvious but are helpful to know.
Single Revisions
You can obviously refer to any single commit by its full, 40-character SHA-1 hash, but there are
more human-friendly ways to refer to commits as well. This section outlines the various ways you
can refer to any commit.
Short SHA-1
Git is smart enough to figure out what commit you’re referring to if you provide the first few
characters of the SHA-1 hash, as long as that partial hash is at least four characters long and
unambiguous; that is, no other object in the object database can have a hash that begins with the
same prefix.
For example, to examine a specific commit where you know you added certain functionality, you
might first run the git log command to locate the commit:
$ git log
commit 734713bc047d87bf7eac9674765ae793478c50d3
Author: Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>
Date:   Fri Jan 2 18:32:33 2009 -0800
    Fix refs handling, add gc auto, update tests
commit d921970aadf03b3cf0e71becdaab3147ba71cdef
Merge: 1c002dd... 35cfb2b...
Author: Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Dec 11 15:08:43 2008 -0800
    Merge commit 'phedders/rdocs'
commit 1c002dd4b536e7479fe34593e72e6c6c1819e53b
Author: Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Dec 11 14:58:32 2008 -0800
218
    Add some blame and merge stuff
In this case, say you’re interested in the commit whose hash begins with 1c002dd…. You can inspect
that commit with any of the following variations of git show (assuming the shorter versions are
unambiguous):
$ git show 1c002dd4b536e7479fe34593e72e6c6c1819e53b
$ git show 1c002dd4b536e7479f
$ git show 1c002d
Git can figure out a short, unique abbreviation for your SHA-1 values. If you pass --abbrev-commit to
the git log command, the output will use shorter values but keep them unique; it defaults to using
seven characters but makes them longer if necessary to keep the SHA-1 unambiguous:
$ git log --abbrev-commit --pretty=oneline
ca82a6d Change the version number
085bb3b Remove unnecessary test code
a11bef0 Initial commit
Generally, eight to ten characters are more than enough to be unique within a project. For example,
as of February 2019, the Linux kernel (which is a fairly sizable project) has over 875,000 commits
and almost seven million objects in its object database, with no two objects whose SHA-1s are
identical in the first 12 characters.

A SHORT NOTE ABOUT SHA-1
A lot of people become concerned at some point that they will, by random
happenstance, have two distinct objects in their repository that hash to the same
SHA-1 value. What then?
If you do happen to commit an object that hashes to the same SHA-1 value as a
previous different object in your repository, Git will see the previous object already
in your Git database, assume it was already written and simply reuse it. If you try
to check out that object again at some point, you’ll always get the data of the first
object.
However, you should be aware of how ridiculously unlikely this scenario is. The
SHA-1 digest is 20 bytes or 160 bits. The number of randomly hashed objects
needed to ensure a 50% probability of a single collision is about 2
80 (the formula
for determining collision probability is p = (n(n-1)/2) * (1/2^160)). 2
80 is 1.2 x 10
24
or 1 million billion billion. That’s 1,200 times the number of grains of sand on the
earth.
Here’s an example to give you an idea of what it would take to get a SHA-1
collision. If all 6.5 billion humans on Earth were programming, and every second,
each one was producing code that was the equivalent of the entire Linux kernel
219
history (6.5 million Git objects) and pushing it into one enormous Git repository, it
would take roughly 2 years until that repository contained enough objects to have
a 50% probability of a single SHA-1 object collision. Thus, an organic SHA-1
collision is less likely than every member of your programming team being
attacked and killed by wolves in unrelated incidents on the same night.
If you dedicate several thousands of dollars' worth of computing power to it, it is
possible to synthesize two files with the same hash, as proven on
https://shattered.io/ in February 2017. Git is moving towards using SHA256 as the
default hashing algorithm, which is much more resilient to collision attacks, and
has code in place to help mitigate this attack (although it cannot completely
eliminate it).
Branch References
One straightforward way to refer to a particular commit is if it’s the commit at the tip of a branch;
in that case, you can simply use the branch name in any Git command that expects a reference to a
commit. For instance, if you want to examine the last commit object on a branch, the following
commands are equivalent, assuming that the topic1 branch points to commit ca82a6d…:
$ git show ca82a6dff817ec66f44342007202690a93763949
$ git show topic1
If you want to see which specific SHA-1 a branch points to, or if you want to see what any of these
examples boils down to in terms of SHA-1s, you can use a Git plumbing tool called rev-parse. You
can see Git Internals for more information about plumbing tools; basically, rev-parse exists for
lower-level operations and isn’t designed to be used in day-to-day operations. However, it can be
helpful sometimes when you need to see what’s really going on. Here you can run rev-parse on
your branch.
$ git rev-parse topic1
ca82a6dff817ec66f44342007202690a93763949
RefLog Shortnames
One of the things Git does in the background while you’re working away is keep a “reflog” — a log
of where your HEAD and branch references have been for the last few months.
You can see your reflog by using git reflog:
$ git reflog
734713b HEAD@{0}: commit: Fix refs handling, add gc auto, update tests
d921970 HEAD@{1}: merge phedders/rdocs: Merge made by the 'recursive' strategy.
1c002dd HEAD@{2}: commit: Add some blame and merge stuff
1c36188 HEAD@{3}: rebase -i (squash): updating HEAD
95df984 HEAD@{4}: commit: # This is a combination of two commits.
220
1c36188 HEAD@{5}: rebase -i (squash): updating HEAD
7e05da5 HEAD@{6}: rebase -i (pick): updating HEAD
Every time your branch tip is updated for any reason, Git stores that information for you in this
temporary history. You can use your reflog data to refer to older commits as well. For example, if
you want to see the fifth prior value of the HEAD of your repository, you can use the @{5} reference
that you see in the reflog output:
$ git show HEAD@{5}
You can also use this syntax to see where a branch was some specific amount of time ago. For
instance, to see where your master branch was yesterday, you can type:
$ git show master@{yesterday}
That would show you where the tip of your master branch was yesterday. This technique only works
for data that’s still in your reflog, so you can’t use it to look for commits older than a few months.
To see reflog information formatted like the git log output, you can run git log -g:
$ git log -g master
commit 734713bc047d87bf7eac9674765ae793478c50d3
Reflog: master@{0} (Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>)
Reflog message: commit: Fix refs handling, add gc auto, update tests
Author: Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>
Date:   Fri Jan 2 18:32:33 2009 -0800
    Fix refs handling, add gc auto, update tests
commit d921970aadf03b3cf0e71becdaab3147ba71cdef
Reflog: master@{1} (Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>)
Reflog message: merge phedders/rdocs: Merge made by recursive.
Author: Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Dec 11 15:08:43 2008 -0800
    Merge commit 'phedders/rdocs'
It’s important to note that reflog information is strictly local — it’s a log only of what you’ve done in
your repository. The references won’t be the same on someone else’s copy of the repository; also,
right after you initially clone a repository, you’ll have an empty reflog, as no activity has occurred
yet in your repository. Running git show HEAD@{2.months.ago} will show you the matching commit
only if you cloned the project at least two months ago — if you cloned it any more recently than
that, you’ll see only your first local commit.

Think of the reflog as Git’s version of shell history
If you have a UNIX or Linux background, you can think of the reflog as Git’s
221
version of shell history, which emphasizes that what’s there is clearly relevant
only for you and your “session”, and has nothing to do with anyone else who might
be working on the same machine.

Escaping braces in PowerShell
When using PowerShell, braces like { and } are special characters and must be
escaped. You can escape them with a backtick ` or put the commit reference in
quotes:
$ git show HEAD@{0}     # will NOT work
$ git show HEAD@`{0`}   # OK
$ git show "HEAD@{0}"   # OK
Ancestry References
The other main way to specify a commit is via its ancestry. If you place a ^ (caret) at the end of a
reference, Git resolves it to mean the parent of that commit. Suppose you look at the history of your
project:
$ git log --pretty=format:'%h %s' --graph
* 734713b Fix refs handling, add gc auto, update tests
*   d921970 Merge commit 'phedders/rdocs'
|\
| * 35cfb2b Some rdoc changes
* | 1c002dd Add some blame and merge stuff
|/
* 1c36188 Ignore *.gem
* 9b29157 Add open3_detach to gemspec file list
Then, you can see the previous commit by specifying HEAD^, which means “the parent of HEAD”:
$ git show HEAD^
commit d921970aadf03b3cf0e71becdaab3147ba71cdef
Merge: 1c002dd... 35cfb2b...
Author: Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Dec 11 15:08:43 2008 -0800
    Merge commit 'phedders/rdocs'

Escaping the caret on Windows
On Windows in cmd.exe, ^ is a special character and needs to be treated differently.
You can either double it or put the commit reference in quotes:
$ git show HEAD^     # will NOT work on Windows
222
$ git show HEAD^^    # OK
$ git show "HEAD^"   # OK
You can also specify a number after the ^ to identify which parent you want; for example, d921970^2
means “the second parent of d921970.” This syntax is useful only for merge commits, which have
more than one parent — the first parent of a merge commit is from the branch you were on when
you merged (frequently master), while the second parent of a merge commit is from the branch that
was merged (say, topic):
$ git show d921970^
commit 1c002dd4b536e7479fe34593e72e6c6c1819e53b
Author: Scott Chacon <schacon@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Dec 11 14:58:32 2008 -0800
    Add some blame and merge stuff
$ git show d921970^2
commit 35cfb2b795a55793d7cc56a6cc2060b4bb732548
Author: Paul Hedderly <paul+git@mjr.org>
Date:   Wed Dec 10 22:22:03 2008 +0000
    Some rdoc changes
The other main ancestry specification is the ~ (tilde). This also refers to the first parent, so HEAD~ and
HEAD^ are equivalent. The difference becomes apparent when you specify a number. HEAD~2 means
“the first parent of the first parent,” or “the grandparent” — it traverses the first parents the
number of times you specify. For example, in the history listed earlier, HEAD~3 would be:
$ git show HEAD~3
commit 1c3618887afb5fbcbea25b7c013f4e2114448b8d
Author: Tom Preston-Werner <tom@mojombo.com>
Date:   Fri Nov 7 13:47:59 2008 -0500
    Ignore *.gem
This can also be written HEAD~~~, which again is the first parent of the first parent of the first parent:
$ git show HEAD~~~
commit 1c3618887afb5fbcbea25b7c013f4e2114448b8d
Author: Tom Preston-Werner <tom@mojombo.com>
Date:   Fri Nov 7 13:47:59 2008 -0500
    Ignore *.gem
You can also combine these syntaxes — you can get the second parent of the previous reference
(assuming it was a merge commit) by using HEAD~3^2, and so on.
223
Commit Ranges
Now that you can specify individual commits, let’s see how to specify ranges of commits. This is
particularly useful for managing your branches — if you have a lot of branches, you can use range
specifications to answer questions such as, “What work is on this branch that I haven’t yet merged
into my main branch?”
Double Dot
The most common range specification is the double-dot syntax. This basically asks Git to resolve a
range of commits that are reachable from one commit but aren’t reachable from another. For
example, say you have a commit history that looks like Example history for range selection.
Figure 136. Example history for range selection
Say you want to see what is in your experiment branch that hasn’t yet been merged into your master
branch. You can ask Git to show you a log of just those commits with master..experiment — that
means “all commits reachable from experiment that aren’t reachable from master.” For the sake of
brevity and clarity in these examples, the letters of the commit objects from the diagram are used
in place of the actual log output in the order that they would display:
$ git log master..experiment
D
C
If, on the other hand, you want to see the opposite — all commits in master that aren’t in
experiment — you can reverse the branch names. experiment..master shows you everything in master
not reachable from experiment:
$ git log experiment..master
F
E
This is useful if you want to keep the experiment branch up to date and preview what you’re about
to merge. Another frequent use of this syntax is to see what you’re about to push to a remote:
$ git log origin/master..HEAD
This command shows you any commits in your current branch that aren’t in the master branch on
your origin remote. If you run a git push and your current branch is tracking origin/master, the
224
commits listed by git log origin/master..HEAD are the commits that will be transferred to the
server. You can also leave off one side of the syntax to have Git assume HEAD. For example, you can
get the same results as in the previous example by typing git log origin/master.. — Git substitutes
HEAD if one side is missing.
Multiple Points
The double-dot syntax is useful as a shorthand, but perhaps you want to specify more than two
branches to indicate your revision, such as seeing what commits are in any of several branches that
aren’t in the branch you’re currently on. Git allows you to do this by using either the ^ character or
--not before any reference from which you don’t want to see reachable commits. Thus, the
following three commands are equivalent:
$ git log refA..refB
$ git log ^refA refB
$ git log refB --not refA
This is nice because with this syntax you can specify more than two references in your query,
which you cannot do with the double-dot syntax. For instance, if you want to see all commits that
are reachable from refA or refB but not from refC, you can use either of:
$ git log refA refB ^refC
$ git log refA refB --not refC
This makes for a very powerful revision query system that should help you figure out what is in
your branches.
Triple Dot
The last major range-selection syntax is the triple-dot syntax, which specifies all the commits that
are reachable by either of two references but not by both of them. Look back at the example
commit history in Example history for range selection. If you want to see what is in master or
experiment but not any common references, you can run:
$ git log master...experiment
F
E
D
C
Again, this gives you normal log output but shows you only the commit information for those four
commits, appearing in the traditional commit date ordering.
A common switch to use with the log command in this case is --left-right, which shows you which
side of the range each commit is in. This helps make the output more useful:
225
$ git log --left-right master...experiment
< F
< E
> D
> C
With these tools, you can much more easily let Git know what commit or commits you want to
inspect.
Interactive Staging
In this section, you’ll look at a few interactive Git commands that can help you craft your commits
to include only certain combinations and parts of files. These tools are helpful if you modify a
number of files extensively, then decide that you want those changes to be partitioned into several
focused commits rather than one big messy commit. This way, you can make sure your commits are
logically separate changesets and can be reviewed easily by the developers working with you.
If you run git add with the -i or --interactive option, Git enters an interactive shell mode,
displaying something like this:
$ git add -i
           staged     unstaged path
  1:    unchanged        +0/-1 TODO
  2:    unchanged        +1/-1 index.html
  3:    unchanged        +5/-1 lib/simplegit.rb
*** Commands ***
  1: [s]tatus     2: [u]pdate      3: [r]evert     4: [a]dd untracked
  5: [p]atch      6: [d]iff        7: [q]uit       8: [h]elp
What now>
You can see that this command shows you a much different view of your staging area than you’re
probably used to — basically, the same information you get with git status but a bit more succinct
and informative. It lists the changes you’ve staged on the left and unstaged changes on the right.
After this comes a “Commands” section, which allows you to do a number of things like staging and
unstaging files, staging parts of files, adding untracked files, and displaying diffs of what has been
staged.
Staging and Unstaging Files
If you type u or 2 (for update) at the What now> prompt, you’re prompted for which files you want to
stage:
What now> u
           staged     unstaged path
  1:    unchanged        +0/-1 TODO
226
  2:    unchanged        +1/-1 index.html
  3:    unchanged        +5/-1 lib/simplegit.rb
Update>>
To stage the TODO and index.html files, you can type the numbers:
Update>> 1,2
           staged     unstaged path
* 1:    unchanged        +0/-1 TODO
* 2:    unchanged        +1/-1 index.html
  3:    unchanged        +5/-1 lib/simplegit.rb
Update>>
The * next to each file means the file is selected to be staged. If you press Enter after typing nothing
at the Update>> prompt, Git takes anything selected and stages it for you:
Update>>
updated 2 paths
*** Commands ***
  1: [s]tatus     2: [u]pdate      3: [r]evert     4: [a]dd untracked
  5: [p]atch      6: [d]iff        7: [q]uit       8: [h]elp
What now> s
           staged     unstaged path
  1:        +0/-1      nothing TODO
  2:        +1/-1      nothing index.html
  3:    unchanged        +5/-1 lib/simplegit.rb
Now you can see that the TODO and index.html files are staged and the simplegit.rb file is still
unstaged. If you want to unstage the TODO file at this point, you use the r or 3 (for revert) option:
*** Commands ***
  1: [s]tatus     2: [u]pdate      3: [r]evert     4: [a]dd untracked
  5: [p]atch      6: [d]iff        7: [q]uit       8: [h]elp
What now> r
           staged     unstaged path
  1:        +0/-1      nothing TODO
  2:        +1/-1      nothing index.html
  3:    unchanged        +5/-1 lib/simplegit.rb
Revert>> 1
           staged     unstaged path
* 1:        +0/-1      nothing TODO
  2:        +1/-1      nothing index.html
  3:    unchanged        +5/-1 lib/simplegit.rb
Revert>> [enter]
reverted one path
227
Looking at your Git status again, you can see that you’ve unstaged the TODO file:
*** Commands ***
  1: [s]tatus     2: [u]pdate      3: [r]evert     4: [a]dd untracked
  5: [p]atch      6: [d]iff        7: [q]uit       8: [h]elp
What now> s
           staged     unstaged path
  1:    unchanged        +0/-1 TODO
  2:        +1/-1      nothing index.html
  3:    unchanged        +5/-1 lib/simplegit.rb
To see the diff of what you’ve staged, you can use the d or 6 (for diff) command. It shows you a list
of your staged files, and you can select the ones for which you would like to see the staged diff. This
is much like specifying git diff --cached on the command line:
*** Commands ***
  1: [s]tatus     2: [u]pdate      3: [r]evert     4: [a]dd untracked
  5: [p]atch      6: [d]iff        7: [q]uit       8: [h]elp
What now> d
           staged     unstaged path
  1:        +1/-1      nothing index.html
Review diff>> 1
diff --git a/index.html b/index.html
index 4d07108..4335f49 100644
--- a/index.html
+++ b/index.html
@@ -16,7 +16,7 @@ Date Finder
 <p id="out">...</p>
-<div id="footer">contact : support@github.com</div>
+<div id="footer">contact : email.support@github.com</div>
 <script type="text/javascript">
With these basic commands, you can use the interactive add mode to deal with your staging area a
little more easily.
Staging Patches
It’s also possible for Git to stage certain parts of files and not the rest. For example, if you make two
changes to your simplegit.rb file and want to stage one of them and not the other, doing so is very
easy in Git. From the same interactive prompt explained in the previous section, type p or 5 (for
patch). Git will ask you which files you would like to partially stage; then, for each section of the
selected files, it will display hunks of the file diff and ask if you would like to stage them, one by
one:
228
diff --git a/lib/simplegit.rb b/lib/simplegit.rb
index dd5ecc4..57399e0 100644
--- a/lib/simplegit.rb
+++ b/lib/simplegit.rb
@@ -22,7 +22,7 @@ class SimpleGit
   end
   def log(treeish = 'master')
-    command("git log -n 25 #{treeish}")
+    command("git log -n 30 #{treeish}")
   end
   def blame(path)
Stage this hunk [y,n,a,d,/,j,J,g,e,?]?
You have a lot of options at this point. Typing ? shows a list of what you can do:
Stage this hunk [y,n,a,d,/,j,J,g,e,?]? ?
y - stage this hunk
n - do not stage this hunk
a - stage this and all the remaining hunks in the file
d - do not stage this hunk nor any of the remaining hunks in the file
g - select a hunk to go to
/ - search for a hunk matching the given regex
j - leave this hunk undecided, see next undecided hunk
J - leave this hunk undecided, see next hunk
k - leave this hunk undecided, see previous undecided hunk
K - leave this hunk undecided, see previous hunk
s - split the current hunk into smaller hunks
e - manually edit the current hunk
? - print help
Generally, you’ll type y or n if you want to stage each hunk, but staging all of them in certain files or
skipping a hunk decision until later can be helpful too. If you stage one part of the file and leave
another part unstaged, your status output will look like this:
What now> 1
           staged     unstaged path
  1:    unchanged        +0/-1 TODO
  2:        +1/-1      nothing index.html
  3:        +1/-1        +4/-0 lib/simplegit.rb
The status of the simplegit.rb file is interesting. It shows you that a couple of lines are staged and a
couple are unstaged. You’ve partially staged this file. At this point, you can exit the interactive
adding script and run git commit to commit the partially staged files.
You also don’t need to be in interactive add mode to do the partial-file staging — you can start the
229
same script by using git add -p or git add --patch on the command line.
Furthermore, you can use patch mode for partially resetting files with the git reset --patch
command, for checking out parts of files with the git checkout --patch command and for stashing
parts of files with the git stash save --patch command. We’ll go into more details on each of these
as we get to more advanced usages of these commands.
Stashing and Cleaning
Often, when you’ve been working on part of your project, things are in a messy state and you want
to switch branches for a bit to work on something else. The problem is, you don’t want to do a
commit of half-done work just so you can get back to this point later. The answer to this issue is the
git stash command.
Stashing takes the dirty state of your working directory — that is, your modified tracked files and
staged changes — and saves it on a stack of unfinished changes that you can reapply at any time
(even on a different branch).

Migrating to git stash push
As of late October 2017, there has been extensive discussion on the Git mailing list,
wherein the command git stash save is being deprecated in favour of the existing
alternative git stash push. The main reason for this is that git stash push
introduces the option of stashing selected pathspecs, something git stash save
does not support.
git stash save is not going away any time soon, so don’t worry about it suddenly
disappearing. But you might want to start migrating over to the push alternative
for the new functionality.
Stashing Your Work
To demonstrate stashing, you’ll go into your project and start working on a couple of files and
possibly stage one of the changes. If you run git status, you can see your dirty state:
$ git status
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git reset HEAD <file>..." to unstage)
    modified:   index.html
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
    modified:   lib/simplegit.rb
Now you want to switch branches, but you don’t want to commit what you’ve been working on yet,
230
